- Hello everyone out there on the live stream.
Thanks for joining us.
If you have any comments,
throw them into the live comments
and we'll try to make it part of the show.
Dr. Becky Smethurst, welcome.
Welcome to the podcast.
- Thank you. - It's so good to have you here.
- Yeah, it's great to be here.
I'm just happy to have the chat about code
on a Thursday afternoon for me.
- Yeah, well, one of the things that I like to do
is I like to tell stories of people
doing amazing stuff with Python,
not making Python necessarily their entire world, right?
Like it's awesome to talk to the people
maybe at Instagram and how they're
building Instagram with Python,
but I think it's also really neat to shine a light
on people doing other things like astronomy
or economics or whatever,
but also using Python as a superpower.
And it definitely gives,
definitely get the sense that that's kind of your world.
- Yeah, it's fun like thinking about,
not just all the things that you can do with Python,
but like humans in general can do the things
that I am doing with Python.
Like that we figured all of this out,
you know, that we can then use a tool like Python to do it.
It kind of blows my mind that I get to do that every day.
- Well, in your world,
there's probably a lot of supercomputers and high-end,
you know, there's a lot of stuff behind the scenes,
behind maybe a simple Jupyter notebook, right?
- Yeah, just a little bit.
Like the Oxford physics,
like a supercomputer is called Glamdring as well.
Like everything's Lord of the Rings references
and sort of like, Zully's like, you know,
like conversations you have with other physicists
in the department being like,
"Oh, did you get time on Glamdring?
Like, how did you get hands on Glamdring?"
Like it makes it sound like we're passing around this sword
between us all like a dull sword.
- That's amazing.
And I, you know, we're going to talk a bit
about your YouTube channel,
some stuff that you're doing there as well
to popularize astronomy and code and whatnot.
But in one of them, you talked about how
at Oxford where you're working,
there's actually some of the scenes
from Harry Potter were shot as well.
So there's all sorts of cool fantasy movie tie-ins here.
Right?
- Yeah, definitely.
So Oxford has the colleges and my college, Christchurch,
is the one they used in the first film
for the steps up to the hall where like,
Trevor finds his toad and McGonagall welcomes them and stuff.
So the amount of times I've walked up those steps
and like quoted parts of the film
'cause I'm such a Potter head.
But then also I managed to like somehow get past the referee
on one of my scientific papers to name galaxies
after Harry Potter characters.
Because like when I was at the telescope taking the data
I was highlighting them like red, blue or green,
depending like whether I was observing them
on like Tuesday night, Wednesday night or Thursday night.
And so I named all the red ones after Gryffindors
and all the blue ones after Ravenclaws
and all the green ones after Slytherins.
So yeah, I ended up with, you know,
writing a paper that was like,
Hermione shows interesting features.
(laughing)
It was great.
- Oh, that's fantastic.
I love that.
So let's kick off a little bit of background about you
with a comment from the live stream.
Robert says, "I like Dr. Smither.
"She reaches for the stars."
Fantastic.
So maybe tell us a bit about yourself.
- Yeah, sure.
So I am an astrophysicist.
I work at the University of Oxford at Christchurch.
And I research how supermassive black holes affect galaxies.
And that's sort of like my day job.
And that includes, you know,
going to telescopes and taking data,
coming back, analyzing that data with Python
and then writing it up and publishing it to the world.
But then sort of as like a side hustle,
I guess you could call it,
I have my YouTube channel
where I like to just chat to people
about space and astrophysics
and all the research that's going on, you know,
in astrophysics right now,
because I think there's often a disconnect
between the public who are like,
I think so many people are interested in space in general,
because it is one of those things
that there's just an abundance of questions
that we don't know the answer to.
And that's why we're still doing the research.
And so everyone is so curious about it,
but they don't have a friendly neighborhood astrophysicist
to ask the question to.
And that's why, you know, try and be for people
and highlight, you know,
what it's actually like to work as an astrophysicist.
'Cause I think a lot of people don't really know that.
It can feel sort of very opaque,
sort of the academic world of research
and being a scientist,
but then also, you know, being like,
oh, there was this new research study published.
What does it actually mean?
Why do we astrophysicists care?
Like what implications does it have for, you know,
our field in general?
How does it fit in?
All those kinds of things.
And really combating as well,
like the rise in the sort of, you know,
conspiracy theory science on YouTube as well.
I feel like if we just flooded YouTube
with like real scientists and real academics
actually doing the research, you know,
that know this stuff, then I guess we can combat that.
- Yeah, so that's amazing.
Two thoughts.
One, I think astronomy is interesting
because it's both so close to everyone, right?
You go out at night and you just look up
and you can't help but go, wow,
I can almost see the craters on the moon.
Like it's right there.
And yet at the same time,
it's also super inaccessible, right?
Like if we want to study, you know, Newtonian physics,
we can throw a rock and watch the parabola,
but we can't really access the stars in that way
or even the planets other than, you know,
they look like stars themselves, right?
Basically, unless you get a proper telescope.
- Yeah, exactly.
There's so many steps that go from just using your eyes
to observe the night sky to stepping through, you know,
buying binoculars, buying telescope,
buying an adapter that can adapt your camera
to a telescope that you've bought to, you know,
putting together loads of lenses of cameras
to make a telescope or going to them like a professional,
you know, telescope that's built with these incredible
detectors that let us see the faintest
of faintest of features.
And with that is where we can start doing some science.
But, you know, I say, even in the 1600s,
what, you know, 400 years ago or so,
people were still doing naked eye astronomy
and learning things about the stars
or even just with binoculars or telescopes, you know,
a very small telescope that's maybe less than 100 quid,
$100, you know, you can see the moons of Jupyter
and you could night by night, every time it's clear,
go out and sort of show, okay,
the four brightest moons of Jupyter are here, here, here,
and here around Jupyter.
Oh, the next night they've moved.
Oh, and the next night they've moved again.
And that's a project you can still do at home.
And okay, yeah, we might understand that,
but that would be one way that you could test gravity
or test the positions of Jupyter's moons,
or even a guy called Olber used one of the moons of Jupyter
to work out the speed of light, 230 years ago.
So there is still stuff you can do,
but yeah, it can feel like, you know,
it's not accessible to the things that we're doing
in terms of black holes or dark matter
or anything like that.
You do need, you know, seven years of education or whatever
to be able to grasp that and do research yourself.
But I guess that's why I wanna be on YouTube.
It's kind of saying, okay,
you don't have the seven years of maths
and physics behind you, but here's the gist of it.
You know, here's what they're saying
and here's what it means, you know?
- Yeah, so the other thing, amazing.
The other thing I wanted to mention or get your thought on
is you point out that there's all this misinformation
and it just boggles my mind.
I just cannot comprehend how we live in a time
of so much accessible information.
And yet there are people, you know,
there's a guy in the United States
that was convinced the earth was flat.
So he built a rocket, shot himself up in there
to disprove it and then crashed and died, I believe.
Because he was like, yeah, I gotta prove it's flat.
All these people keep telling me that it's not.
And you know, it's so good on you
for putting out like interesting, compelling, you know,
stuff for, you know, science for people to learn about.
- Yeah, I think it's also just like really getting out
like the process of science.
Like you collect evidence, you test an idea you've had,
but if the evidence doesn't match that,
you have to change your ideas.
And I think that's where people get stuck on science
is that they have some emotional attachment
to an idea like the earth is flat.
They can't change their mind when presented with evidence
that isn't, but it's the same thing where people like,
oh, I've never really liked the idea of dark matter.
So I'm really skeptical of it.
You know, like it's the same thing.
It's like, well, you know, you have to look at the evidence
and as begrudgingly as astronomers eventually came up
with the idea of dark matter after ignoring
sort of the evidence for years,
you know, that was sort of something that is like,
when you understand the history of all that stuff
that's built up, it's very easy to see why we think
what we do.
And I think that's something I try and focus on
to try and combat those sort of like science skeptics
or, you know, people who have emotional attachment
to stuff like that.
And this misinformation is the how we know,
not just what we know, 'cause I think that's so important.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I know there's a lot of stuff going around this,
like this whole coronavirus era, like, well,
the scientists said this, and then they changed their mind
and they said something else after further research
was done.
So they must have no idea what they're doing.
Like, no, that's called science.
You make up your own, and then you follow up.
All right, so let's get into some of the coding topics
a little bit here.
You know, before we get too far into it, you know,
how do you get into programming in Python?
You know, out there on the livestream,
we also have a sort of similar question,
maybe you could tie them both together.
It's how do you learn Python for astronomy
as an intermediate Python program?
I have an intermediate Python program,
so any advice on how to get better
to apply Python to physics?
- Yeah, sure.
So I didn't even come across coding or Python
until I was at university.
So it must have been my second or third year
there was actually Python courses
as part of the physics course.
You know, teaching it you from scratch, basically.
And I never learned it at school
because it just never crossed my radar.
Like I did what would be the equivalent
of sort of like IT computing for what we call our GCSEs
up to when we're 16, but that was like Excel spreadsheets.
- Right, right.
More like computer fluency stuff, yeah.
- Yeah, the practical exam was like a three-hour
practical exam.
I think I finished it in an hour and I was just like,
oh, God, it's just an Excel spreadsheet.
So I wish we'd done something like that then
'cause I think it would have prepared me better
because so much science is ingrained in Python.
And it was great, the introduction we had at university
because we learned the basics,
but then the next minute you were like,
okay, so code up Einstein's theory of general relativity
'cause there's just the laws that you follow
and do that round a black hole
and look at how the strength of gravity changes
as you get closer to it.
You know, that was something that was really cool to be set.
And it sounds so complicated to try and code up,
but it's like a couple of functions
and you're done kind of thing.
So yeah, I found that so difficult at the time,
but looking back now, I'm like, that was so simple.
- Why did that seem like, well, you know,
thinking back to the code that I've written,
I remember being so just thrilled and satisfied
of getting some simple little program working,
but it seemed like a giant achievement at the time.
You know, it probably fit on one screen and whatnot,
but that's how it is when you're learning, right?
- Yeah, I mean, even just like being like,
what is a terminal?
You know, like print hello world,
like what is this?
I remember that being such like a mammoth,
like obstacle to get over of just like getting
into like the language and everything like that.
But that comes from just immersion, right?
In it.
And the same thing is true for learning how to apply Python
to astronomy or to physics.
It's immersion in both the language that's used
in astronomy and physics,
but also then the coding modules that are so useful to you,
like Python modules, for example,
I'm just gonna shout out the Astropy Consortium now,
'cause they're incredible.
It's this whole open source project that's developing,
you know, everything from how to, you know,
plan your observations if you're using a telescope.
So you give it coordinates of an object and it's like,
this is when this is visible in the sky, you know,
to, you know, then reducing that data or converting,
you know, a redshift to an age of the universe,
for example, like something cosmological,
like, you know, that people would be writing
their own little, like HTML widgets
for like about 10 years ago,
but now is so ingrained in the Python master stuff.
So there's a lot of them.
- You know, so much of it seems like it would be very,
like a huge challenge, but these days,
it may be 20 years ago, it was,
but these days it's, you know, grab this package,
call that function, know what it does, right?
And then, you know, grab something on Astropy
or something in Jupyter or Plotly or Altair and off you go.
- Exactly, so I would definitely,
if anyone wants to get into it,
definitely recommend starting with the Astropy project,
'cause they have so many tutorials and everything,
'cause it's all open source that
they're all probably Jupyter notebooks as well.
So it would be a great sort of jumping off point
to get involved.
Say, you know, wanna get into astrophotography maybe,
and you wanna reduce your images,
clean them up with Python,
that would be a really fun project to do.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Quick, maybe related question from Frey out there is,
do you use basic Python or is there a special Astropy?
I think that's interesting.
- No, it's the usual Python.
You know, there was a big sort of like collective,
like, oh, change to Python 3.6 or 3.7,
whatever it is, during the Astrophysics community
when everyone's stuff broke,
but it's the normal basic Python
just complemented by the Astropy package.
- Yeah, I think that's one of the powers of Python.
And maybe you could speak to this
from your slice of science,
but I think this is why Python is so popular
for computational science in general,
is that it's just Python plus, right?
And it's so accessible, right?
You can start out with a very simple program,
add to it, add to it,
and you never think of yourself as a programmer,
but all of a sudden you end up with functions in a package.
You're like, what am I doing?
How do I become a programmer, right?
- Exactly, yeah.
I think that's the thing about programming,
though, is as long as you have a task,
you're rolling, right?
You're on your way to becoming that.
It's almost like not knowing where to begin
or not knowing what to do with it that sort of scuppers you.
So yeah, it's sort of weird
that you can do so much with Python.
It's so flexible for data tables,
but I can also pull in an image that I've taken as well,
or I can, you know,
the idea of NumPy as well is just an absolute lifesaver.
Like the fact that I can,
you know, the fact that it's like, you know,
row and column manipulation,
you can do something across the entire array.
Like I have images that are arrays, right?
So I can do something across the entire image
with NumPy like that.
And it, yeah, it's just, it's so easy to use.
There are some tools in astrophysics that, you know,
we have languages called IDL that were really developed
for astronomy. - Specifically for astronomy,
yeah. - Yeah.
And I find IDL hell, sorry, excuse my language.
But like I find you run it and it does a different thing
the second time you run it.
And I'm like, why?
(laughs)
- It should not do that.
- Oh, it shouldn't, no.
And then like IRAF as well,
which is a similar thing that was developed,
but they're just, they're not as intuitive
and easy readable as Python, I don't think.
And so I think that's why Python has really took off
in the astronomy community.
- Yeah, yeah, very cool.
Well, the next question I always ask my guests
after introductions,
is what they do day to day.
But I kind of want to anchor our conversation
around your YouTube channel
on these cool videos you put out there.
So not only do you have an answer for that,
you have an incredible video.
- A whole video.
(laughs)
- So yeah, an 18 minute video you put together
of a day in the life of a Oxford astrophysicist.
And basically it's like a time-lapse with commentary, right?
Maybe you want to just talk about,
you know, summarize that video for people a little bit.
- Yeah, sure.
I get, 'cause I just got asked this question so much,
like, what do you actually do?
And I just figured the easiest way was to show people.
So I show people everything from, you know,
leaving my house and getting on the train
to arriving at the office and lunch
and all the things in between kind of thing.
So there's a mixture of, you know,
me doing everyday things like checking emails.
That's almost part of it.
Communication between your colleagues to say,
oh, I've got this new result.
I've got this new plot.
Oh, can you read my paper?
This is really cool.
Checking all the new research that's been published.
- Yeah, so you literally, sorry,
you literally have like the time-lapse of,
say you at your desk and you're like,
oh, that's on the screen.
I must've been doing this right now.
Oh, now I'm doing this, something in Jupyter
and now I'm off to this.
- Yeah, exactly.
So there's bits of me working with Jupyter
and definitely like doing,
I was doing a little test of my hypothesis
'cause I had some new data that came in.
I then went to a talk that was given by a visitor
to the department who was one of the leads
in the event horizon telescope
that made that picture of the black hole,
the orange donut as people call it.
- That was such huge news.
A couple, was that last year or a year and a half ago?
- A year before, 2019.
That's crazy.
But yeah, so that was really cool to show people
that that's part of our day.
We go to talks and listen to people present their science.
And then also, I happened to be on the radio that day.
I picked a very exciting day.
So I was like, go to the radio.
- Yeah, it's so glamorous.
Like, oh, I'll be this person
who's probably gonna win the Nobel Prize
and here I'm on the BBC for a while and back to lunch.
- Yeah, so there was just lots of bits in my day that were,
and then also, we have a big, what we call a journal club
where we bring a research paper
that's been published that week
and we go through it in our research group
and talk about it to find out how it fits in
with our research, that kind of thing, and what it means.
And I get a lot of my ideas from videos
from those kind of journal clubs as well,
'cause I'm like, we talked about it as colleagues
and then I'll make a video on it to sort of say,
well, this is what we found cool this month kind of thing.
And yeah, it just showcases the whole day,
but then also a little bit,
it's why it's an Oxford Astrophysicist
because it's also like,
we also took the speaker to college dinner,
which is like a very fancy dinner in a nice room
and we all got dressed up and had drinks
and stuff like that, it's like very Oxford.
But it showcases that side of it
because that networking side of things.
So there's code in there, there's a talk,
there's lunch, there's dinner, there's everything.
So it was a fun video. - Yeah, it seems fabulous,
actually, yeah, yeah, it seems really great.
So one question, I guess one quick meta question,
and then one other question.
So how did you film this?
Is it just eight hours or 12 hours
of full-on high-res video or?
- It wasn't high-res 'cause it was on my old iPhone,
so it was like 720p, so it wasn't that high-res.
I think it was, yeah, I cleaned my phone basically
of pretty much every picture and video I take
and backed it up and then literally just carried it around
in my little GorillaPod all day, plonked it on the desk,
and then took it with me wherever I went.
And I would stop it if I was leaving the room.
I would set a new file going
so it didn't break or anything.
And it was permanently plugged into a charging block as well
'cause it was an old phone,
so it was running out of battery constantly.
And I just took it everywhere and I felt stupid doing it.
(laughing)
Just carrying around being like,
"Hi, yeah, sorry, I'm filming."
But people were always asking me what I was doing
everywhere I was going and people loved the idea of it.
So yeah, it was fun.
- Yeah, it seemed really interesting.
I actually thought you did a great job with it.
The non-meta question is,
what did you learn about yourself?
Did something surprise you?
Did you go, "Oh my gosh, I had no idea"?
- I remember thinking this was quite a full day,
but it didn't feel like I was rushing around
or doing anything.
I just think when you watch something in time lapse,
it feels so busy.
So all the comments were like,
"Oh my gosh, she does so much in a day.
"She looks so busy."
And I was like, I didn't feel that way kind of thing.
But I felt like I was like,
'cause there's a part of it where it's filmed mid November
and the Christmas adverts for all the big department stores
have just come out in the UK.
And there was a part of it where I just caught myself
watching one of those.
And I was like, stop wasting time in your day on Twitter
or watching videos.
So there was bits like that, I guess, that I learned
that I was kind of like,
"Gosh, that's literally sort of like so much time."
One thing I did find though,
is that I was very productive
because my phone was always recording.
I couldn't just pick up my phone and scroll or anything
because it was always filming.
Yeah.
So I had quite a productive day because of it.
- How interesting.
All right, well, let's go ahead and jump into
sort of the main topic here is
the reason that you caught my attention
as maybe a guest for the show is
you did this really interesting video,
five ways that I use code as an astrophysicist.
I think this relates back to that superpower.
Python is a superpower, not,
we should take all the people that are in finance or math
and turn them into programmers,
but people that have interests,
give them some other thing.
And you really touched on how programming
is so valuable, but it's not necessarily communicated
to that when you're in the sciences.
I did a math degree and I don't remember really
till maybe my senior year in college
when they're like, "You really need to learn programming."
That was just for a research project, right?
- Yeah, I think I was the same.
I think I was given various different projects
that were like graded in my second and third year.
And then in my fourth year,
I was given a research project on galaxies.
And it was like, "You're gonna need code to do this."
And that was when I finally became comfortable using it.
And you realize, "Oh, I have thousands of galaxies.
I don't have to do this in an Excel spreadsheet.
There's a better way."
And if you have images, you have to analyze,
"Oh, I can do it in the same function.
I can do it in the same piece of code or whatever."
And yeah, I think that's not communicated
how much and how many different ways
you are gonna end up using it
and how many ways it just makes your life
just generally easier to use it.
- There's problems you could solve without writing code,
but if you know how to do it,
there's no way you would spend half an hour
doing something by hand.
Like, you know, we just write a little program
and in three minutes, half of it's done ever and ever.
Every time, over and over, yeah.
- Yeah, there are things that I've picked out in my day
that I've been like, "I do this nearly every day.
I should just write a function for this."
And you just save yourself so much time.
- Yeah, I totally agree.
There's certain things I have to do
to work in my business and I'll just be like,
"This is so painful.
I can't believe I have to do this."
And I'm like, "Why have I not stopped
to just write a program that does this?
This can be automated.
Why have I done this for three months
and suffered over and over?"
And then I'm just endlessly happy when I do that.
So let's cover the five ways.
Like, you've already set the stage
of why people in science in general
and astrophysics in particular
should care about these things.
But what are the five ways?
- Oh, it reminds me what order I put them in.
I can't actually remember.
- I got them here.
The first one you gave was image processing.
- Yeah, okay, so this is a big one for astronomy,
obviously, is that we, you know,
I am an astrophysicist and an astronomer.
So I take images of the sky
and then use them to do my science.
There are some people who are very theoretical,
so they'll either run computer simulations
or they'll work with sort of the maths
and so they don't really tend to do that.
But as an astronomer, I take images of the sky
and I have to analyze them.
So for one thing, you have to remove
all the sources of noise in the image.
So that's essentially just, like I said before,
it's a NumPy array, right?
Because all you've recorded when you've taken an image
of the sky is how bright each pixel is.
And so what you want, say you're observing,
like I would be, I would be observing a galaxy.
In my image, I would have the light from the galaxy,
but I would also have background light
from just the sky in general.
So like light from the sun that's scattered
around the atmosphere and then hits the detector,
but also just noise that comes from the detector itself.
So the detector thinks it's detected light,
but it's actually just that it's a little bit warm,
for example, you know?
So the way it does it is light comes in,
pings off an electron from in an atom,
but that can happen if the atoms are just a little bit warm.
- Yeah, you give an example of,
even if you close the shutter and have no light at all,
it kind of looks like a background,
we're in the TV channels.
You know, you had like that antenna, not the cable, right?
- Yeah, it looks like static.
Yeah, exactly, it looks like fuzz.
So you have to remove all those things from your image
if you just want the image with galaxy leftover at the end.
So there's clever ways you can do that.
Like you said, you just leave the shutter closed
and you get an idea for what the noise looks like
for that detector.
You can take an image of just like sky
and then you'll work out, okay, well, that's the noise
I need to remove for that bit and everything.
And again, it's just non-pair, right?
It's just taking them all out.
And sometimes you'll also have cosmic rays
that come in and hit your detectors.
So that's really super high energy radiation.
And it looks like just a little sort of super bright pixel
or maybe three pixels, like they're just like,
and if they're off to the side, it's fine.
You just take them out.
But if they're right on top of what you want to observe,
that's so annoying.
And similarly with-
- That's where the exoplanet transit is supposed to be.
What's going on?
- Yeah, exactly.
Similarly with like satellite trails as well,
which is obviously becoming a bigger issue
with sort of the SpaceX constellations
and everything like that as well.
All those need to be removed.
- Is there gonna be some kind of AI type thing
that just goes, I now detect SpaceX satellite transit
and can just-
- Stop observing.
Yeah, I think that's hopefully the sort of moving forward
is that more will be shared between astronomers
and sort of the people who are manning
those big constellations of satellites.
'Cause it's great what they want to do.
They want to bring internet to the farthest corners
of the world, which is always great in my book.
It just, moving everything to space in terms of astronomy
is just not feasible.
Like the money it would cost and everything.
And like the fact that you can't fix them
if something goes wrong, if they're in space.
We still need telescopes on the ground.
And so if there's some form of, yeah,
like you say an AI that's like,
warning, SpaceX satellite trail coming.
Like you just sort of stop your observation
and start up again.
But yeah, if we don't have that at the minute,
so you sometimes do get a satellite trail
that's not in there and you have to remove that.
And it's so easy to do with Python.
Again, AstroPy, there's loads of functions in there
that help you out as well with removing
so that the detectors aren't always perfect either.
So they have a response function, we call it,
where they'll have some efficiency of like 95%
in the middle, but it will drop off at the edges.
And so you'll have to account for that as well
in the processing of the image.
All those kinds of things you can use Python to do.
- You've got to somehow adjust what the telescope sees
and retrofit that to try to be as close to reality
as not what the picture says, right?
- Yeah, and there are sometimes as well.
So one of the things that can affect your images
is just turbulence in the atmosphere.
So the same turbulence that you get when you're on a plane
and you pass through like a warm or a cold pocket of air
and all of a sudden you feel it shake.
If light passes through that, it can get really distorted.
And so they actually do some real time adjustment of images
on some telescopes.
So you might've seen images of telescopes
where they're pointing like a giant laser
out of the top of them.
And that laser, you're essentially recording
what happens to the laser as it passes through the atmosphere
and the same way that noise canceling headphones work,
where they record the noise and then invert it
so you don't hear it.
You record what's happening to the laser,
invert that and put it on the image
that you're getting from the telescope
and you can get rid of the atmosphere.
- How interesting, I'd never realized that.
- Ruining your stuff.
- Yeah, I always wondered how they were able to
account for like the waves of heat
and all sorts of stuff in the atmosphere
and still get these super clear pictures
from ground-based telescopes.
- That's how they do it, lasers.
- Awesome, it's like it's in the future, but now.
All right, so the next one that you talked about
was data analysis and processing large quantities of data.
And that's actually what's on the screen here
in the live share as well, right?
You have this really cool example of,
was it brightness of 600,000 galaxies?
- Yeah, so one of the biggest surveys
that's ever been taken, so you can do stuff like I do
where you sort of spot, observe galaxies
you're interested in, but then there are some telescopes
that's just sole job is to survey the entire sky
or the entire northern sky or entire southern sky
and then you end up with like,
here's all the things that's been observed
and you have to write algorithms
to pick all those out, that's another side
of obviously astronomy as well,
is like picking out the areas of interest
from this huge survey.
And you can end up with data tables that are like,
here's 600,000 galaxies that have been found
with the brightness.
So that thing you're showing there,
so you've got an ID in the first column
and they're like 18 digits 'cause it's all sorts of like,
you know, coordinates in there and everything.
But then U, G, R, I, and Z is five measures of brightness
in different what we call wave bands.
So U is sort of like the bluest light
and then Z is the reddest light.
And so you can, if you look in sort of different colors
of light, you can see different things.
So blue is lots of new stars, red is lots of old stars.
And so that's what you have for like 600,000 galaxies.
- That's amazing.
- But then you also have all the other things
that you might have measured as well,
like their size and their shape
and you know, various other different,
you can end up with tables that are just huge essentially.
And you'll see that, I don't know,
eagle-eyed people might see that the format for the table
is .fits, F-I-T-S.
And that's a format that was invented by astronomy as well
because it's a format that can both take a table like that,
but it can also store an image at the same time.
But you can store both a table and an image
or many images, you know.
So there's all sorts of different things
you can do with it.
So it's very, very useful.
I think it's called a flexible image table system,
but don't quote me on that.
(laughing)
- Yeah, we have full of acronyms in astronomy.
So yeah, things like that,
where you wanna be able to load in the data table,
manipulate that data, you know, say, okay,
transform this column into something else
that I'm interested in,
whatever it might be for 600,000 columns, you know,
but you don't wanna do that on an iterative loop again,
like NumPy is great for that.
It's just, it's a perfect tool for it.
- Yeah, and so, you know,
maybe if you didn't have Python as a skill,
you might try to do this in Excel
or maybe even slower would be Google Sheets
or something like that.
- Yeah.
- But I think those have a limit around 100,
you know, 1.05 million rows.
And then also your mental wellbeing
in terms of how long you're gonna wait
for stuff to happen, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
- Yeah.
One thing that you do point out in the video
when you're talking about this
is the mistakes that people have made,
especially around the NHS, is that it?
- Yeah.
- Where the health--
- The test and trace.
- Yeah, the test and trace stuff
where they tried to do this with Excel
and, you know, missed a ton of COVID cases in the early days.
- Yeah, exactly.
Just 'cause, you know, when you have that many rows,
it's so difficult to keep track of in a spreadsheet.
You know, with this, you can index it really easily.
You can say, give me all the rows
that have fulfilled this, you know,
value or quantity or whatever.
And it's just much easier to stay on top of and manipulate.
You know, in astronomy, there's lots of people
who use, you know, Panda's data frames as well
to do this kind of stuff.
So, you know, it's using all the tools that are available.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
A couple of listener comments.
One is, how long would it take roughly
for the code to parse and analyze the data?
And what would you do with that?
I think that leads well into the next one.
- Yeah, I mean, loading data tables,
even in 600,000 size is so quick in Python.
Like I'd blink and it's done it.
- Yeah, exactly.
I touched on that.
Like you would wait in Excel for a while.
- Yeah, you would wait just to open the spreadsheet.
Whereas this is just like, yes, I'm done.
- Yeah, it's almost instant, right?
Probably. - Yeah.
And then again, like, I mean,
it depends what you're doing, right?
If you're, you know, just transforming
one value into another.
So for example, people who are familiar with physics,
like flux into luminosity.
So for example, flux is what you observe
because you're very distant away from something,
but luminosity is like the absolute value it would have
if you were like right next to it.
That's how bright it would be.
- Yeah.
- For example, that's just a simple translation, right?
So that on 600,000 rows would probably be quite quick.
But if you're doing something a little bit more complex
where you're taking each value
and perhaps using it in inference or something like that,
like optimizing a model based on all these values
or something that would obviously take a lot longer.
You know, I've had code run from anywhere
from a second to a week.
So, yeah, it just depends what you're doing.
And then I think it might, yeah,
like you said, lead into the next one
is what would I do with the data afterwards?
I'd make a plot with Matplotlib.
- Yeah, and that leads into, yeah,
the next thing that you covered,
which was model fitting and that sort of thing, right?
So Freya asks, how do you search the galaxies
and find the ones you need for your research?
- Yeah, I mean, so for example,
I'm really interested in a certain shape of galaxies.
So I call them the egg white omelets of the galaxy world.
So if you think- - Not the spiral galaxies.
- No, so if you think about a spiral galaxy,
it's a nice flat disk and it has, you know,
the spiral arms on the outside,
but in the middle there's usually what we call a bulge,
but you can think of like an egg yolk, right?
It's like a fried egg, a galaxy.
And it has this bulge of stars that instead of, you know,
on a nice flat disk where all the stars are orbiting,
like in the solar system, like planets in the solar system,
you've got stars that look a bit more like a beehive
because they're sort of all doing this, you know,
in various different planes around the very, very center.
And we think those form when two galaxies merge together
and you just, you ruin all the nice rotation
and you end up with this just big blob in the middle.
I'm interested in the things that don't have that blob.
So we think they don't, they haven't had a merger, right?
And I think, okay, well,
what's happened to the black hole in the middle
if you haven't merged two things together
and shoved a lot of stuff into the center?
So that's what I'm interested in.
So I need two things to do that.
First of all, I need to know what shapes the galaxies are.
And that kind of stuff comes from literally,
well, two ways.
First way that we've been doing it for a long time
is people eyeballing the images and looking at them
and labeling.
They have spiral structure.
It has a bulge.
It doesn't have a bulge.
It looks like it's merging, all that kind of stuff.
And that's been done individually by people,
from Edwin Hubble back in the 1920s
to the poor PhD students that are given 50,000 of them
to look at as part of their PhD and label them.
But then more recently in the past 10 years,
a project called Galaxy Zoo,
which is a, what we call a citizen science project online.
So galaxyzoo.org still running,
gets the public to classify the shapes
because it's a fairly simple task
for even like a five-year-old to do
is to show them an image and say,
"Is this round and blobby or is this a spiral shape?"
And that, 600,000 images of galaxies,
that would take one astronomer years,
would have terrible statistics.
There'd be mistakes all over the place
'cause they hadn't had their morning coffee
or something yet before they started.
We can get instead 40 people to look at each image
and it's fantastic statistics and all that as well.
And that's still going
'cause we're still taking pictures of the sky.
But there were people out there thinking,
"Well, what about machine learning?
Can you train a machine to do this with an algorithm?"
And yes, you can.
So Galaxy Zoo actually held a Kaggle competition for this
as well about five or six years ago
and found that you can get sort of like 90%
sort of like agreement with an expert human.
And we're getting to the point now
where Galaxy Zoo is running on the website,
but we've got a machine in the background,
which is deciding what to show to people.
The machine's like,
"I've classified all the simple, easy things,
but I'm not sure about these ones.
So can you look at this?"
So it's sort of like a joint effort
and that's gonna be really important
with the next generation
of big survey telescopes we're building.
People might've heard of the LSST
or it's been recently dubbed the Vera Rubin Observatory.
- And there's so much data coming out of that thing
that is ridiculous.
- Yeah, they're estimating instead of like 600,000
to a million, they're estimating like a billion galaxies.
- Wow.
- So that's not scalable to get a person
or a couple of astronomers to do that.
So that's where we need machine and crowd to do it.
And yeah, so once you've got those classification labels,
either from machine or cloud,
then it's just the column in your data table, right?
And then you can filter based on,
give me all the things with the lowest vote
for having this bulge in the center
and I'll look at those and sort of whittle it down
kind of thing.
So yeah, it's really how you choose them.
It's just from a data table.
- Yeah, once you get the number,
then it's super easy, right?
It's coming up.
I did have, recently I had David Armstrong and Yann Camper,
they're out of the UK as well.
At least David is.
How they used machine learning to discover 50 exoplanets
in some of the Kepler data as well.
So yeah, it's super interesting
how ML is starting to make its way into astronomy.
- Yeah, and that's another area
where ML and citizen science are working together.
So there's a, like Galaxy Zoo,
there's a project called Planet Hunters,
which is using the follow-up to the Kepler space telescope,
which is the one that discovered like 5,000 exoplanets.
There's now a follow-up called TESS,
which is doing the same.
And so they're like,
we have run our algorithms in the ML on all the data.
It's found what we've told it to look for,
but then here's all the data.
Do you see anything else?
Do you see planets?
Do you see anything weird?
Do you see things unexplained?
And that's the thing that you really need people to eyeball.
- Right, right.
The ML is gonna find what it knows to find, but--
- Yes, exactly. - That looks weird,
but not, you know, but also--
- Not what you've told me to look for.
- Yeah, exactly.
- You know, you can't train a machine
to look for stuff that's just interesting,
'cause everything will be interesting to it, you know?
So-- - Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, that's the problem with software.
You know, you give it input,
it gives you a number out the other side,
and it's easy to trust that number,
but that's not always the way that it goes.
All right, so the next one you talked about
was data visualization,
and you had some really interesting examples
of galaxies colliding, which you kind of touched on,
and then also your research is around black holes,
and so there's a visualization you show
of a star coming too close to a black hole--
- Yes. - Being spaghettified.
- (laughs) Yeah, that's one of my favorite words ever,
spaghettification, is what happens
when you get too close to very strong gravity,
like around a black hole,
where the gravity's stronger at your feet than at your head,
so you get stretched out like spaghetti.
(laughs)
I'll look at spaghetti the same way afterwards.
But yeah, so data visualization can be anything
from plotting two columns in a data table
against each other in a nice scatter plot,
and being like, "Oh, look, there's a correlation there,"
and then you can fit a line to it
with an optimization, like thinking sci-fi or something,
and that's one side of it,
of sort of data visualization.
And then there's the sort of 3D data visualization
you can do with Plotly, again,
of three columns in a data table.
But then there's things you can do like this,
where you have simulated what's actually happening
around a black hole, and you've said,
"Okay, my black hole's here,
"and I have a star over here that's gonna get too close.
"If I codepol the laws of gravity
"in Einstein's theory of general relativity
"and set it running, what happens?"
(laughs)
And then visualizing what you actually see.
And obviously, the code behind this
is literally like an array telling you
where more of the particles that used to be in the star
now are on this grid that you've made,
where one point on the grid will be a black hole.
And every sort of time stamp that you run it at,
so maybe you do it for every, say, a year or something,
I guess, on these timescales.
We're talking astrophysics, right?
So we're not gonna do that every second.
- So short, just a year between frames?
- I know, yeah.
So a year between frames, you recalculate
where they all are now based on the laws of physics,
and then you obviously wanna visualize those arrays
as something that we can actually picture what's going on,
and you can play them as a beautiful movie like this
as well, and it looks amazing.
But you get, obviously, so much understanding
from that as well.
And it's fun to, you know, you don't,
'cause I don't run a lot of simulations day to day,
so it was fun then just to break down
what that actually looks like behind the scenes
in terms of, yeah, that is just a bunch
of NumPy arrays, basically.
- Yeah, how interesting.
The star is just a bunch of points
that represent a glob in the beginning.
- Yeah, exactly.
I mean, that's all to do with, like,
N-body simulations, they're called,
so N being the number of particles you simulate,
and obviously, the number that you decide to simulate,
it goes up, I think it's N squared
in terms of computing power and stuff.
So yeah, it's very difficult.
I mean, this is why, you know, like,
running what we call cosmological simulations,
where you simulate the entire universe,
it's obviously very difficult.
They take years to run.
- You need a lot of RAM for that.
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
And then, obviously, this is what I was talking about before,
where you have a nice 3D visualization.
So this is of something called the Radcliffe wave,
which was discovered this time last year.
And it was something that was nearby
to where the sun is in the Milky Way.
So this is sort of like gas cloud positions,
but until they plotted them in a 3D way
so that you could drag around the data and overlay,
okay, these are known positions of other things,
and these are the shapes of, say, the spiral arms nearby,
it was then that you could actually see
spatially what was going on.
They realized that this was actually a feature
in the Milky Way, and so they can just drag it around
and everything on Potley, so it's great to see.
- Super cool.
Yeah, so I kind of skipped you out of order your video,
so there were simulations.
- Sorry.
- No, no, it's my fault.
- They're kind of both the same.
- Yeah, yeah.
And there's data visualizations.
And so this is just Plotly, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
And it's tools like this, though, that like you say,
oh, that seems obvious to plot something in 3D
to see the spatial scale, but if the tool didn't exist,
the tool didn't exist, you know?
- Yeah, so as say somebody who's a scientist
or just looking to visualize data,
they just need to get it into basically
like a NumPy array of data, throw it at Plotly,
give it some colors, and it does all the visualization
and the rotation and the zooming and that stuff, right?
So it's more accessible than maybe it seems.
- Yeah, and that's the thing is that it is very accessible.
But what I love is that astronomy is driving forward
a lot of these tools as well,
'cause you were saying we need this.
People often say like,
why do we bother studying astronomy?
Like, shouldn't we put money into other things?
But I think one of the sort of indirect benefits
is how much astronomy drives forward technology.
Digital camera detectors were invented
because astronomers needed a better way to record stuff.
And Wi-Fi was massively improved
because astronomers came up with a better way
to recombine signals that have been scattered
as they go around your house and stuff.
And another thing is tools like this.
And especially when we look towards a lot of the VR stuff
that's coming out soon as well.
So I'm thinking about like, you know,
when you can put on a VR headset
and you can be immersed in an image
or anything like we have now.
We like to call them 3D images.
So we'll take an image of something
at every single wavelength or wavelength steps, right?
So from infrared to uv or from red colors to blue colors.
And I said before, there's lots of different features
that pop out of those things.
So you can imagine actually being able to be immersed
in that to actually see it for yourself
rather than maybe doing it something like Plotly.
Or you could also imagine there's a star called Eta Carina
that we think is very close to supernova and collapse.
And people have observed it for years
and seen the big 3D structure of it
and model the 3D structure.
People have 3D printed it,
but you can imagine being put in a VR environment
and being able to fully, you know,
move stuff around and get underneath things.
- Walk around it, look under it.
- Exactly, yeah.
And sort of that kind of a tech is the kind of thing
that I can really see a lot of science pushing forward.
Like it having a use case,
which at first it necessarily didn't in society,
but science gave it a use case.
And then all of a sudden it was developed.
And then all of a sudden society realized
another use case for it.
And it snows, snowballs from there really.
- Yeah, super neat, super neat.
So that video covered the five things
and then you interviewed your friend, your colleague,
who also actually did more simulation work
and analyzing and whatnot.
So yeah, I recommend people check out that video.
Of course it'll be in the show notes.
Are you ready for some quick career advice
before we move on? - Sure.
- All right, so out here in the comments,
would you recommend a computer science for A-level
so it'll be easier to use code in university?
What subjects would be best for astrophysics?
- Yeah, I mean, computer science definitely
won't hinder you in terms of science.
Like I think it's great to sort of know
about the ins and outs in computing.
And you will do a lot of coding
as part of a computer science A-level
or whatever is the equivalent in your country.
So that's sort of like the 17 to 18 year old
that we do in the UK, the exams.
Other subjects, obviously physics,
obviously maths for sort of context.
I, so we only do four subjects,
maybe only three for our A-levels.
We specialize very early in the UK,
but I did physics, maths, chemistry, further maths,
which is like extra maths.
And like, that was just 'cause they were my favorite subjects
and I knew that they were the ones
that if I had a pile of homework,
I'd be picking those off the top,
rather than my English homework or whatever.
- There'll be some essay buried underneath
that's gotta get rid of. - Yes, exactly.
And I'd be like, I'll do that later.
And like future me would hate me
'cause I'd put it off for too long.
I'd be doing it the next day right before the class.
And so that's, I did those and that was great
because I got to university and,
you know, the further maths helped
'cause there was some I'd already seen.
But like, I think when you're at school,
it's often quite pressurized to feel like
you have to know everything
to either get into university or before university.
But that's kind of the point of college or university
is they're there to teach you these things.
They don't expect you to know everything.
So just give yourself the best, you know, platform
to get into whatever subject you care about the most.
So if you're considering a certain subject
at a certain university,
just check what their entry requirements are.
If they're like, oh, actually we would need you
to do computer science, then great, take computer science.
But otherwise, you know, just take those subjects
that you like the most is what I would say.
- And then also another interesting question from Georgia.
You know, we have been talking
as we're just taking Jupyter for advantage.
Jupyter's here so we just use that.
But the question is, you know,
was the Jupyter ecosystem a game changer
for astronomy and training and your opinion?
And in what way?
I mean, I think it was for science.
- Oh yeah, I mean, it didn't exist when I was learning
and I think I would have picked it up a lot quicker
if it had existed.
I think because it's just a more familiar interface
than being faced with a terminal or, you know, a blank.
I used idle way back in the day, right?
I looked like a blank idle, like empty, what's the word?
File, thank you, brain finally came out.
That's a long day at work.
Yeah, I think it would have been a lot easier.
And I do a lot of my tutorials and stuff like that
that we share around colleagues.
And I also like right now I've got,
we read a paper the other day,
we were like, this is really cool.
We could test that.
It would be a really quick plot if we just made it.
So I've done that in Jupyter Notebooks.
I've been like, and I've been like, you know,
marked down being like, we read this paper,
here's the length of the paper.
Like we had this idea, so let's test it.
Here's the data, here's the plot we make
and here's what I think it means.
And I'm gonna share it to my colleagues
and they'll read it through so much more easily
than if I'd sent an email with an embedded PDF
or something, right?
- A lot of times you send the picture,
but obviously you don't necessarily send the code
and people are like, well, what is this?
What does this mean?
Like, are you sending the same thing I'm sending?
Like, yeah, it really is combined those
in interesting ways, I think.
- Yeah, and I think it really was a game changer,
especially for astronomy,
just because astronomy is such a visual science
that seeing both the code and the images next to each other
and what each step physically did to the image,
you know, like I was talking about before,
like removing all the sources of noise and all that stuff,
that is so helpful in Jupyter.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, well, we're getting a little bit
near the end of our time here,
so I wanna wrap it up with one thing
that I think is also worth giving a shout out to.
And then you did a nice video,
an astrophysicist reacts to funny space memes.
So I'm gonna, we'll close it out with that,
but you also wrote a cool book
that came out pretty recently, right?
Called "Space, 10 Things You Should Know."
You wanna tell people about that?
- Yes, yeah, sure.
So it's "Space, 10 Things You Should Know"
is the title in the UK,
and "Space at the Speed of Light"
is the title in North America and Canada.
So "Space, 10 Things You Should Know"
everywhere else in the world.
- Yeah, that's why I'm in the UK,
I'm as I'm when I pulled it up.
- Yeah, sure.
So it's about, it's sort of like 10 short essays
on the things that I feel like you should know
if you're wanting to either dip your toe in astronomy
or you know, you have someone who's loved it for a long time
but wants to make sure that they like, you know,
do I really know this stuff?
You know, if you were going to a dinner party
with a bunch of astronomers,
like these are the,
like you'd want this sort of like base knowledge
to be like, oh, I get what they're talking about.
- How much differential equations do I need to know?
- There's none, absolutely none.
It's written, so it's written with my,
like I'm talking to my mom basically.
So my mom is intelligent, but not necessarily educated.
So she didn't, she's finished school at 16.
So she didn't have the privilege of an education like I did.
She just started work straight away.
And so she's so curious about space and the universe.
Like I think a lot of people are.
And so I wrote it with her in mind of being like, okay,
what would my mom understand if I said to her, you know,
and she loved the book.
So I take that as a good thing.
So, oh, Freya, thank you.
- Yeah, Freya says my favorite book as well.
- That's so nice.
Yay.
But yeah, so it's, I really enjoyed writing it.
It's nice and short, so it's not too intimidating
if you don't wanna read a big long book about space,
but there's everything from like, okay,
like why do we think dark matter exists, for example,
but like could aliens exist?
And also like the things we still don't know as well,
which I like.
So I like to think about that.
- It seems like everything is known.
You look at it so much.
- But no.
- No, there's so much more that we don't know.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Fantastic.
All right, so I wanna do not the same memes,
but I wanna kind of round this out just as a fun,
like let's do the memes.
Let me, I've hidden this on our screen share, so.
(laughing)
- So I couldn't see what you were planning.
- You couldn't jump ahead, but all right.
- I'm excited.
- All right, so I'll pull up a couple of memes here,
and I'll try to describe these to the listeners
'cause almost everyone's just listening.
- Sure.
- But yeah, so setting the stage here,
on yours, this is kind of a sneaker educational video
that you did, right?
- Yes.
- You did the meme, but then you talked about the science.
- Yeah, people were commenting like,
"I clicked for a meme review,
"and now I've come away with more knowledge
"than any physics class I ever took."
(laughing)
It's like a sneak attack.
- Exactly, all right, we go through these pretty quick.
I'll try to describe them.
All right, so the first one,
we've got, remember Elon Musk shot at SpaceX,
shot his Tesla Roadster and put a camera on its space
and was flying along, but actually,
this is around the same time that Apple Maps came out,
and it was really bad.
So the meme is, it's Earth in the background
with the Tesla flying through the air.
It says, "Stupid Apple Maps."
(laughing)
- I love that, I love it.
'Cause it really, you know what, I miss Google Earth.
Can we bring, is Google Earth still a thing?
I feel like when that came out,
we spent so long zooming out and seeing the entire Earth,
and then all we do is just zoom in to our house.
(laughing)
- Exactly.
- All the way from the whole neighborhood.
- I'm like, I wonder where that high control ended,
and I went along it for so far, yeah.
- Yeah, but yeah, I feel like Apple Maps was just so,
it wasn't intuitive with the zoom,
and you could end up just like,
oh God, I can see the entirety of Europe right now.
- Exactly.
- I don't need that.
- All right, next one.
There's an otter carrying two little tubes.
(laughing)
Shooting along, he says,
"He needs those parts for his spaceship.
"He's going to otter space."
- I kind of wish that I studied black holes
in otter space now,
'cause I feel like they would be cuter for one thing.
(laughing)
Also infinitely cool.
- Yeah, all right, next one.
You touched on this, you talked about the Wi-Fi.
So I have no idea why there's a seal here,
but it says, "NASA receives data
"from over 17.3 billion kilometers away."
I lose the Wi-Fi signal in my own bathroom.
(laughing)
- But that's the thing though,
the techniques that are developed
to recombine all the scattered signals
from 17.3 billion kilometers away
are the same ones that are used to recombine your Wi-Fi,
but apparently brick walls are better disrupting them
than the Earth's atmosphere is.
- Yeah, the magnetic field,
17 billion kilometers, all that, awesome.
- Yeah.
- All right, a couple more.
- Also, NASA's detectors are much more sensitive
than your phone detectors.
- Yeah, that's true.
- You wouldn't wanna carry that around.
All right, so this one is a different kind of eclipses.
So we've got the moon, the Earth, and the sun,
and it tries to show you what the difference
between a lunar and a solar eclipse is.
So it has moon, Earth, sun, it says lunar eclipse.
It has Earth, moon, sun, solar eclipse,
and then it has Earth, sun, moon, apocalypse.
- Apocalypse, that's great.
It's so, so good, I love it so much.
- Yeah, that's a good one.
All right, what else?
- You can never see the moon, that'd be so sad.
- All right, so here's a picture
of a traditional alien like E.T.,
and it says, "Here's a creature capable
of intergalactic space travel, steals a cow."
(both laughing)
- And the thing is, people justify this as like,
well, the cow population is greater
than the human population,
therefore they will have assumed.
I was like, if they go by that,
they'll be abducting loads of chickens.
- Exactly.
- It's so crazy.
- This one made me laugh really hard, I like this one.
All right, another one?
- I mean, I would love aliens to be real,
but I doubt that we'll ever make
that kind of contact with them.
- Exactly, exactly.
I do think they probably are out there,
but they're far, far away.
All right, so this one is really close to your research.
It's a black hole, and then there's stuff around it,
but you can see nothing in the black hole.
It says, "What happens in a black hole
stays in a black hole."
- Yeah. - Kind of like Las Vegas.
- I mean, that is like the most physics-accurate meme
we've had so far.
- Yeah, I tried to find a few science-y ones.
And then let's see what's the last one here.
Oh yeah, this one has the moon,
which is just a picture of the moon,
and then the dark side of the moon,
he's dressed up like the emperor from "Star Wars."
- Palpatine, yeah. - Yeah, Palpatine, exactly.
- That's so cute.
I want a little, do you remember they made,
NASA made a load of little plushy teddy bear things
of the planets and all of their little satellites
a while ago, and now I want the dark side of the moon
as a little plushy toy.
But people get so confused with the dark side of the moon
and the far side of the moon,
'cause the far side of the moon is the moon
that we can't see, because it's what's called tidally locked
so only one side of the moon ever faces us.
But that's not the dark side of the moon,
'cause when we have a new moon, or a solar eclipse,
the far side of the moon is lit up.
So people get so confused. - Exactly, 'cause we never
see the dark side of the moon.
Yeah, yeah. - Yeah.
- Yeah, it is confusing.
But still a good meme.
All right, those were fun, thanks.
(both laughing)
- They're great. - Yeah, yeah.
- All right, so final two questions of the show.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use?
- VS Code, I love VS Code.
VS Code, it only just pipped out Atom.
Like, I was using Atom, and then I started using VS Code.
Command + D in VS Code, basically you can highlight
a parameter you've defined, and then it picks out
all of the other times you've mentioned that parameter
in your script.
And you're like, oh, I wanna change the name,
and if you start typing it, it'll just change it everywhere.
And like, the biggest joy I ever felt was discovering
that that was a thing.
- Why is this named, I don't wanna change it.
Wait, it's so easy to change.
- Yes, yeah, exactly, it's great.
- Yeah, and I suspect you probably throw Jupyter in there
as well as a lot of, right, but not properly.
- Yeah, yeah. - Those are kind of
more exploration.
- Yeah, if I was doing something that I was gonna share
with colleagues, I'd do it on Jupyter.
So the final stage where I would visualize my data
in a plot, or I'd be able to write something out
as an argument, I'd do it in Jupyter as well.
But if I'm doing model fitting, or if I'm doing a lot
of heavy sort of image analysis, I will do it in a script
in VS Code.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
I think there's just different ways of working.
Are you trying to build something that you can reuse
and kind of create a little library out of,
or are you trying to explore and you don't really know
where you're going yet, right?
- Exactly, yeah, I'd use Jupyter for doing that as well,
being like, okay, I have this data table, it's brand new,
let's get to grips with it.
And I'll do that in Jupyter again,
'cause it's just so visual to be able to grab stuff
more easily and be like, hmm, let's plot this against this
and see if there's something there.
Like I'll do that in Jupyter.
Rather than like a, I used to do it in an IPython terminal,
but it's just so much more visual.
- Yeah, it'll pop up a little window or whatever,
yeah, exactly.
- Yeah, well, that's another thing I love about VS Code
is that when I then write up my papers, so I use LaTeX,
which is another programming language.
VS Code can run the LaTeX script for you.
- Oh, nice, it basically compiles it to that.
- Yeah, so it can also do the same with Python as well.
You can highlight a little section
and get it to run in a terminal as well
with like shift enter, like you do in a Jupyter notebook.
- Oh, yeah, okay.
- Yeah, so it's just great, it's just great.
- Fantastic.
All right, and then final question.
There's almost 300,000 different packages out on PyPI,
and that's sort of the part of the beauty of Python, right,
is just you can go grab these things and bring them in,
but what one maybe you've come across you wanna recommend?
- Yeah, so I was trying to think of something
that would be applicable to everyone
and not just someone in astronomy,
and my immediate thought, and I can't deny it,
it's been one of the most useful packages ever to me,
is MCEE, E-M-C-E-E, by Daniel Formamacki,
who is an astronomer as well,
and it's a module that codes up Bayesian analysis,
like Monte Carlo, Markov Chain Monte Carlo, so MCMC,
and it's essentially like an optimization package,
you know, like a sci-fi optimized or something like that,
but it uses Bayesian statistics to do it
and the Markov Chain Monte Carlo,
so it's a really sophisticated way of optimizing,
but also getting sort of like,
like, okay, you fit at this model, this is your best fit,
but this is how uncertain this model is as well,
is what it gives you,
and it's just so like ready and out of the box,
it's so well documented, it runs great,
and it's just, I just can't fault it,
like, that's the thing, - Yeah, that's awesome.
- and Dan is just like the coolest person,
he's like, he's just like,
he taught me so much Python when I was a PhD student
and he was sort of like a senior PhD student as well,
and he has an accent very similar to yours, actually,
he's definitely from,
I think he's from the Pacific Northwest,
but I don't wanna say that in case I got it wrong,
and he's like, "No."
(laughing)
- He's from Southern California.
- Yeah, exactly, but he's an accent like yours,
and so I associate that sort of like really sort of like,
very sort of like slow, not slow, that sounds bad,
but you know what I mean,
that sort of like cadence to an American accent.
- Yeah, to whatever, yeah, uh-huh.
- Yeah, exactly, like I associate that with just like,
okay, I'm gonna teach you this cool thing about Python,
(laughing)
like hold your hand through it, so, yeah,
it's a great, great package,
if you're doing anything to do with like model fitting
or Bayesian stats or anything like that,
I would like 100% recommend.
- Awesome, yeah, that's not something I've tried yet,
'cause I haven't had to use that,
but it sounds really, really useful.
Just as a funny story, since you brought up accents,
so for like 10 years or so,
I did professional development,
like training, I'd go to a company or somewhere,
do like a week-long in-person course,
and I did this one in Beijing,
and I think the students were nervous
that I would come, maybe with like a broad Scottish accent
or something, it'd be very hard to understand,
and at the end of the course,
everyone had to write a little review
for the company I was working for,
and like, what did you think of Michael as a teacher?
And then the company, they would go through and review
if there's any weird comments,
like, oh, what happened to this course, like why did it go,
tell us about why this weird, you know,
people were unhappy or they're,
you know, what did you do to make them so happy or whatever,
and the comment was just this,
Michael has a very good tongue.
(laughing)
And they're like, you're gonna need to explain this.
What is going on?
I'm like--
- Was it a mis-translation?
- Yeah, yeah, it was like, he has a good accent,
like he speaks clearly and like whatever.
- Yeah.
- But it was just like the way, on paper,
the way they ended up with, they contacted me,
like, Michael, you need to tell me what's going on here.
- I love that.
My accent confuses people massively
because I was like brought up in the Northwest of England,
but my mom's family are all from the Northeast of England,
so it's this odd smush,
and then most Americans haven't really heard
a Northern accent, or if they have,
it's like, Sean Bean, you know?
(laughing)
Let's take the hobbits to my city.
If that's all they've ever heard,
that's another Lord of the Rings reference,
God, they're flying today.
And so, yeah, and then I've spent obviously a lot of time
in the South of England now since I've moved,
and my accents have to soften
because academia and science in general
is such a global thing, you know,
so many people with so many different cultures
and accents coming together,
that if I talked in my normal one,
I think a lot of people ask me to repeat things
so many times that it softens and it gets more,
I enunciate things more now,
which makes me sound posher, which I don't like.
(laughing)
But never mind.
- Yeah, how funny.
All right, so what a great conversation.
Thanks for being here, Dr. Becky.
It's, you know, like I said, you're doing great work.
People should certainly check out your YouTube channel
and what you're doing there.
You're doing a lot of cool work to popularize science
in a super accessible way.
So final call to action,
people are interested in what you're doing.
Maybe they wanna, you know, get Python into their astronomy
or maybe they wanna get into astronomy.
What's your final call to action for listeners?
- Install Astrobyte.
I think it's a simple pip, install Astrobyte to get into
and check out all their documentation as well.
And, you know, do as much physics and maths as you can
and get involved with Galaxy Zoo and Planet Hunters online
'cause all those kind of clicks end up
in scientific research papers
and they thank the participants as well.
So it's a great endeavor to be involved in.
- Yeah, and one question on the way out,
you know, someone was asking if they can read your,
can the public read your papers?
Do you have to be part of a journal subscription?
- No, so all astronomy papers get posted
on something called the Archive, A-R-X-I-V.
No, Astro-P-H on the Archive.
And so they're all free to read.
So you should be able to find them that way.
They're all listed from my public website as well, actually.
So you should be able to find them there.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, well, thank you so much for being here.
And it's been really fun to have you on the show.
- Thanks for having me.
Have fun. - Yeah.
[ Migrantages on the Frontline ]